Progress Report July 2021 (#292)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jul-2021/index.md

per second), and the [bit-depth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_bit_depth) (how many bits are used to represent the "loudness" of the signal's samples at any given point 
in time).

In this PR, Maide introduced a number of methods to process formats that were missing in the current implementation — namely, the ability to decode PCM files encoded with a 
bit-depth of 8-bit, 32-bit, and also floating-point values.
Since previously none of these formats were being decoded by yuzu, any audio file that made use of them was not being reproduced, causing this behaviour.

`Tales of Vesperia` was another title with sound problems, in which audio would be played monaurally through the left channel — far from a pleasant experience, as you can hear 
here:

{{< audio "./vesperiabug.mp3" >}}

This game in particular would request the available number of active channels and cap its output based on this information — in other words, the game would not output audio to 
more channels than what yuzu reported.
Since yuzu was always returning a value of `1`, the game ended up outputting all the audio into the left channel.

> This problem was thus fixed by [reporting two channels as active instead of one](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6567), which is now mixed properly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, this problem was fixed by [reporting two channels as active instead of one](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6567), which is now mixed properly:
```

{{< audio "./vesperiafix.mp3" >}}

Not satisfied with just this, Maide also went on and [changed the downmixing logic](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6569), which improved the audio in titles such as 
`The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening`, `New Super Mario Bros. U`, `Disgaea 6: Defiance of Destiny`, and `Super Kirby Clash`.

Simply put, downmixing refers to the process of combining multiple audio channels so it is possible to reproduce them in a system with a lower number of available audio 
channels.
There is some mathematics involved here and there, but the general idea behind it is to balance the volume of these individual channels so that the resulting signal sounds 
centred.

In the case of the Nintendo Switch, many games report six audio channels as available to the system, even though they end up providing data for only two channels (stereo sound).
Consequently, yuzu would think the games used all these channels and then "downmix" them to stereo, affecting the volumes of the left and right channel in the process, which 
would end up being much quieter than needed.

> While the maths used by yuzu are valid when used to downmixing six-channels-to-two, it certainly was not a desirable effect in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the math used by yuzu is valid when used to downmix six channels to two, it certainly was not a desirable effect in this case.
```

A [NaN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) is a type of placeholder used by computers to represent numeric values that can't be defined otherwise — hence, the acronym 
`N`ot `a` `N`umber.
Particularly, the problem at hand lies in the fact that, in order to operate over the samples of the audio signal, these gain values must be converted into integers.
But in this process, the `NaN` values, in turn, become obscenely large positive and negative integer values.

As these samples were further processed by yuzu before sending them to your sound system, these gains would distort and cap the volume of the audio samples to their maximum or 
minimum value, causing this bug.
To prevent this problem, Maide added a check that [changes the gain value from NaN to zero in such cases](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6571), so that no error is 
propagated along the mixing.

This is mostly a workaround, as it still remains under investigation why the game is yielding these `NaN` values, but at the very least, it should help prevent a number of 
bleeding ears here and there.

## Input changes

> Along with some miscellaneous QoL changes, [german77](https://github.com/german77) also changed the behaviour of recently enabled controllers in yuzu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Along with some miscellaneous quality of life changes, [german77](https://github.com/german77) also changed the behaviour of recently enabled controllers in yuzu.
```

In order to provide the most precise experience, now [sticks will be auto-centred](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6698) the moment the device is detected by yuzu.

> Surprisingly, this happens with almost every game controller, sticks always are slightly off-centre, and if the dead zone value is small enough, users would perceive slight drifting during gameplay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Surprisingly, this happens with almost every game controller, sticks are always slightly off-centre, and if the dead zone value is small enough, users would experience slight drifting during gameplay. 
```

No drift in this emulator!

Thanks to internal changes on how settings are stored, the default values of mouse panning were affected. 
german77 [restored the previous values](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6659) and additionally solved an issue where the emulated stick would always look down if the user 
had multiple screens.
No drift, not even with the mouse!

# UI changes

> A silent change that has the potential to improve performance considerably to users of old or low end CPUs has been made by toastUnlimited.
> In the past, we recommended our users to manually select the `Unsafe` CPU accuracy option if their CPU lacked the FMA instruction set, this is not only confusing for the users, 
> as it required them knowing if their specific CPU model was compatible with FMA, but also relied on communication channels and guides properly explaining this to as many people 
> as possible, of course resulting in several users not even knowing why they ran games at such poor performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A silent change that has the potential to improve performance considerably for users of old or low-end CPUs has been made by toastUnlimited.
In the past, we recommended our users to manually select the `Unsafe` CPU accuracy option if their CPU lacked the FMA instruction set. This is not only confusing for users, 
as it required them to know if their specific CPU model was compatible with FMA, but also relied on communication channels and guides properly explaining this to as many people 
as possible. This, of course, resulted in several users not even knowing why they ran games at such poor performance.
```

Additionally, it was later discovered that using the whole Unsafe preset can cause precision issues affecting things like the shape of the character hitboxes in 
`Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`. A better solution was needed.

> toastUnlimited now offers us [the all new `Auto` CPU accuracy setting!](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6573) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In response, toastUnlimited implemented [the all new `Auto` CPU accuracy setting!](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6573) 
```

> Enabled by default for all users, this setting determines the need to use the `Unfuse FMA` value automatically, by reading if the FMA instruction set is supported by the CPU 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabled by default for all users, this setting determines the need to use the `Unfuse FMA` value automatically by reading if the FMA instruction set is supported by the CPU 
```

in 
use.
It also sets other values, for example `Faster ASIMD instructions`, to boost the performance of 32-bit games.
Auto CPU accuracy has the potential to more than triple the performance of users running old or very low end CPUs!

Thanks to work done by Morph, [now all default six Miis are available to the user](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6556) in games that request them.

{{< imgs
	"./mii.png| We're still far away from offering full Mii customization, but at least more options are available now (Mario Kart 8 Deluxe)"
  >}}

> [lioncash](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6574), our silent optimizer and code cleaner, found an issue with the new strings that report if a game is 32 or 64-bit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[lioncash](https://github.com/lioncash), our silent optimizer and code cleaner, found an issue with the new strings that report if a game is 32 or 64-bit.
```

Languages that read from right to left had issues with the initial implementation, and translating this string was disabled.
[Now both issues are resolved!](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6574)

After gathering more information on the behaviour of the FPS unlimiter, epicboy discovered that some games will crash when attempting to boot them unlimited.
[Simply force-enabling the limiter at each game boot is enough to solve the issue.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6576)
Remember to unlock the framerate manually after you start a game!

[vonchenplus](https://github.com/vonchenplus) is back with another nice addition!
Certain game dumps contain several games inside them, and yuzu would default to only launching the first one in the list.
[This change makes the necessary modifications so all games are properly listed.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6582)

{{< imgs
	"./games.png| "
  >}}

## Command-Line Shenanigans

> toastUnlimited did a general [update to the settings of the command-line version of yuzu](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6651), `yuzu-cmd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
toastUnlimited performed a general [update to the settings of the command-line version of yuzu](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6651), `yuzu-cmd`.
```

The previous implementation had many options that were originally carried over from Citra and later deprecated, as well as others that were not read properly from the `ini` 
file, or were read but not written into the `ini` file, etc.
In other words, there were a lot of things wrong with it, and some updating was in order to properly synchronize everything back with the settings present in the main 
executable of yuzu.

Since toastUnlimited was already working on `yuzu-cmd`, he also went on and [fixed some problems related to Vulkan on Linux](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6652).

> When this executable was launched, it wouldn't be able to detect the window manager, and would proceed to exit instead of booting a game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this executable was launched, it wasn't able to detect the window manager, and would proceed to exit instead of booting a game.
```

The cause behind this problem lies in the fact that we recently updated how the SDL external library is being fetched for our Linux binaries, which came with a dummy 
configuration file with invalid settings.
toastUnlimited made it so that we manually include the correct generated configuration file for building SDL instead of this dummy, while also adding some new logging 
information to report when support for a window manager was not compiled.

In a follow-up PR, toastUnlimited also added [support for the full-screen mode settings](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6693) to `yuzu-cmd`.
Concurrently, he also fixed a bug that caused yuzu to render with the wrong resolution when in full-screen.

> Some time ago, we made it possible for yuzu to run on different full-screen modes, but these options were never added to the command-line version of our executable, which is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some time ago, we made it possible for yuzu to run in different full-screen modes, but these options were never added to the command-line version of our executable, which is 
```

> addressed on this PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addressed in this PR.
```

## Technical Changes

> Meanwhile, [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei) was busy [improving the management of kernel objects](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6551), reducing drastically the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meanwhile, [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei) was busy [improving the management of kernel objects](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6551), drastically reducing the 
```

memory, even though the information became basically useless at this point.

One of the many jobs of the kernel in the OS is to keep track of all the resources available in the system.
For this reason, these dangling objects were a problem, as the kernel calculates the number of resources that can be spawned based partly on the number of active objects in 
memory.
With dozens of different kernel objects being created thousands of times between emulation sessions, this easily saturated the amount of objects that could be spawned due to yuzu hitting the resource limits much earlier than expected.
What's more, since these objects stick around even after the emulation session is closed, this is a memory leak that would gradually increase for as long as the emulator is running a game — in other words, it would persist even if you stopped the emulation and started it again.

bunnei took a long look at the problem and improved the situation, but there's still ongoing work to make our implementation more robust and accurate.

> blink also had his share of bufixing work, as he revisited the texture cache code related to [1D-to-2D texture overlaps](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6553), which fixes problems in `Monster Hunter Rise` and both the the trial and final versions of `Monster Hunter Stories 2: Wings of Ruin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blinkhawk also had his share of bug-fixing work, as he revisited the texture cache code related to [1D-to-2D texture overlaps](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6553), which fixes problems in `Monster Hunter Rise` and both the the trial and final versions of `Monster Hunter Stories 2: Wings of Ruin`.
```

Similarly to how two-dimensional textures are mapped to three dimensions, one-dimensional textures are a simple type of texture that is mapped as two-dimensional when rendered 
on the screen.
The problem here lies in the fact that the GPU is unable to tell the difference between a one-dimensional texture and a two-dimensional texture with a height of one.

As such, it was necessary to add support for them, so that they can be processed correctly by our texture cache.

> With the changes on this PR, blink made it so that they can be copied seamlessly, fixing this faulty behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the changes in this PR, Blink made it so that they can be copied seamlessly, fixing this faulty behaviour.
```

{{< single-title-imgs
    "From Zero to Hero (MONSTER HUNTER STORIES 2: WINGS OF RUIN Trial Version)"
    "./1d2dbug.png"
    "./1d2dfix.png"
    >}}

If you're interested in a more technical explanation about textures and their types, we recommend reading 
[the D3D11 documentation provided by Microsoft](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3d11/overviews-direct3d-11-resources-textures-intro).

## Future projects

> `Project A.R.T.`, the designated name for our revival of the resolution scaler, has started, and early results look very promising!                    .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Project A.R.T.`, the designated name for our revival of the resolution scaler, has started, and early results look very promising!
```

{{< imgs
	"./art.png| Getting blue-shelled at 4K doesn't really help with anger management (Mario Kart 8 Deluxe)"
  >}}

> There are many bugs to fix, optimizations to make and tons of testing to do before we can safely release this feature. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many bugs to fix, optimizations to make, and tons of testing to do before we can confidently release this feature. 
```

So for now, know that the scaler is returning!

toastUnlimited [started the preliminary work to get an operational Linux installer](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6667) to accompany our current Windows one. 
This also means offering precompiled builds for both Mainline and Early Access.

> Once it is finished, Linux users will no longer need to be forced to build from the source (if so they prefer)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once it is finished, Linux users will no longer need to be forced to build from the source (if they so prefer)!
```
